SPECIAL ARTICLE
The Nokia SEZ Story
Economy of Disappearances
Madhumita Dutta
The closure of Nokias mobile phone assembly plant in Sriperumbudur, near Chennai, just eight years after it commenced production, illustrates how corporations can quit operations at a point when it is no longer profitable for them to continue, while the impact of such closures on workers is profound. The special economic zones policy of the state actively promoted corporate-led industrialisation promising employment, and creating aspirations among young workers. There was no accountability or labour-centred exit policies factored into the states industrial policies when state governments welcomed private investments. With the closure of Nokia, not only have promises been broken, but its workers and supply companies have lost their livelihoods and future possibilities of work.
In May 2014, around 4,800 workers of a mobile phone assembly factory outside Chennai, took voluntarily retire- ment from their jobs. Many were as young as 21 years. They were all workers of Nokia, a Finnish phone company that had once dominated the mobile phones business globally. In 2005, when the company decided to set up its largest phone assembling plant in India, promising to churn out 6.5 lakh phones a day, and bring in big investments along with supplier companies that would generate thousands of jobs, an excite- ment gripped the central and state governments. The entry of the phone company and its seven supplier companies was seen as the harbinger of electronics hardware manufacturing in Tamil Nadu and a positive outcome of the special economic zones (SEZ) policy and legislation.
However, eight years after creating a big buzz, everything fell silent. Gone were the jobs, the workers, and the promised investments; the Nokia mobile phone factory shut down, lock, stock and barrel. And 10 years down the line, even the SEZ policy hardly has many takers. In 2013, union minister of com- merce and industry while responding to a starred question in Parliament acknowledged: reduced interest in setting up SEZ units ... is visible in the increased requests for denotification of SEZs especially in the last two years (GoI 2013). Between 2011 and 2013, 54 projects were de-notified by the Board of Approv- al for SEZ projects.
A Conjuring Trick
In 2000, anthropologist Anna Tsing (2000) wrote of a dramat- ic event that took place in Indonesia. A small Canadian mining company claimed that it had found gold in the forests of Kali- mantan, Indonesian Borneo. The find grew big over a period of three years (during 199497) with investors from North America, pensioners, even towns in western Canada investing money into this small Canadian company. Then all of a sudden in 1997 it was announced that Busang was barren! It was a spectacular theatrical performance as Tsing (2000: 118) writes: Bre-X was always a performance, a drama, a conjuring trick, an illusion, regardless of whether real gold or only dreams of gold ever existed at Busang. She calls it the eco- nomy of appearances, the self-conscious making of a specta- cle [that] is a necessary aid to gathering investment funds (Tsing 2000: 118).
The story of Indian SEZs is somewhat similar to what Tsing describes. It was a spectacular performance in the media by Indian politicians, bureaucrats, industry associations, all
       This article is based on the authors PhD research work.
Madhumita Dutta (madhudutta.new@gmail.com) is postdoctoral scholar, Center for Global Workers Rights, School of Labor and Employment Relations, College of the Liberal Arts, The Pennsylvania State University, US.
 Economic & Political Weekly EPW december 17, 2016 vol lI no 51
43
 
SPECIAL ARTICLE
selling the dream of a secured future, and for the people it was, as Jamie Cross (2014:68) notes: stable, secure, employ- ment that lay at the heart of their hopes. He called the zones exemplary site[s] of anticipatory practice, where an un- knowable future is explored through modes of planning, calculation ... mapping development visions (Cross 2014: 9). Since 2000, SEZs were first introduced into Indian economic policy. Later in 2005, they were legislated into national law and incorporated into industrial policies of the individual states, the idea of zones conjured possibilities of an economic prosperity with increased industrial production, foreign in- vestments, exports, employment generation, and the develop- ment of large-scale infrastructure projects. However, in 2014, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) severely criticised SEZs for their failure to deliver on all counts. CAGs 2014 report notes that 52% of land allotted to SEZs, some dat- ing back to 2006, had remained idle; land acquired for pub- lic purposes (to set up SEZs) had been diverted for commercial purposes (up to 100% in some cases) after de-notification of several SEZ projects (CAG 2014: v). The report also showed, based on data from 117 SEZs that there was a nearly 93% shortfall between the actual employment generated through these projects and what was promised or projected during approval of the SEZs.
Further the CAG (2014: 20) report noted the selective loca- tion of the zones in already industrialised and infrastructur- ally developed states, exposing the fallacy of the claims that zones are necessary for overall regional development. Based on the data available on trade, investments, exports, employ- ment and infrastructure, the CAG (2014: iv, 10) notes that SEZs do not show any significant impact on any of the factors that were the key objectives for setting them. Instead, the govern- ment highly subsidised private capital via tax exemptions of more than 